Hey friends. I want to
thank our sponsor. Reagan, are
you struggling to replicate the
bugs and performance issues that
your customers are reporting? Plug
Reagan into your web and
mobile applications right now, and
diagnose problems in minutes rather
than hours. Kiss goodbye. Having
to dig through log files
and relying on frustrated users
to report issues, make your
software development life so much
easier. Using Reagan's error, crash,
and performance monitoring tools. Every
software team can create flawless
software experiences for their customers
with Reagan. Try it free
today@raygun.com. That's our a Y
G U n.com. Hey friends,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes today. I'm talking with
Melanie and sciencey, the head
of security and privacy communications
at Uber, but more importantly,
she's a shark diver. How
are you? I'm good, Scott.
Thank you so much for
having me. I love your
Twitter, but it's a very
interesting mix between like, you
know, privacy and security and
like Def con type stuff
and sharks what's with the
sharks. Yeah, so I actually
started college as a Marine
biology major as from a
really young age as a
kid. I wanted to be
a shark scientist. And so
while it is not what
I ended up doing professionally,
it is still a really
big part of my life.
And, you know, folks who
do follow me on Twitter
will get to see all
kinds of like photos and
videos from the shark dives
that I do from time
to time. It's kind of
my way to, to recharge
and take a break in.
And when I need a
vacation from all of the
security and privacy drama, swimming
with sharks is far more
relaxing. The irony is thick,
dealing with sharks online, and
then I need to relax.
I'm going to go and
swim with some sharks. Yeah.
I mean, to be honest,
the, the sharks in the
ocean are far lower risk
And that is absolutely true,
but so this is a
hobby, but you, you didn't
like you didn't abandon your
degree. Like you're probably like
doing low key amateur research
on sharks. I mean, I
think so. I think I'm
more following and learning from
the research that all of
my friends are doing that
was, that actually completed our
program and, and went on
to actually become, you know,
PhDs in Marine biology and
ecology and, and those related
fields. But I do draw
a lot of experiences and
insights from that time in
my life. And the research
that's come out of that
field in the way that
I do my job now
in terms of communications for
security and privacy issues. So
while I may not spend
as much time in the
ocean, as I would like
to on a day to
day basis, like some of
my friends who are professional
researchers, a lot of, I,
like I said, I draw
a lot from that field
in the role that I
do have. Now You were
an adjunct professor at Boston
university. You worked at Facebook,
you've worked with Def con
for the world's largest hacker
conference for many years. And
now you're at, at Uber.
What got you excited about
kind of cybersecurity in general,
Morbid curiosity, I think at
first, but it wasn't a
field that I intentionally went
into after I shifted away
from Marine biology. I started
doing more kind of environmental
communications and started getting into
technology communications through kind of
a field of corporate sustainability.
And at the time that
I, you know, entered the
field like software was coming
into play in terms of
doing environmental, like footprint analysis
and things like that. So
working with those types of
companies from the beginning, I
was kind of, you know,
making kind of the step
into the technology space and
through a chance kind of
set up of different circumstances.
I ended up working with
the chief security office at,
at and T for about
six years. And that's really
where I cut my teeth
in security, was working with
their engineers, their product solutions
team, understanding not just what
engineers do in regards to
security, but also businesses and
companies in terms of how
do they invest in this
area from a product perspective
and a procurement perspective. So
I didn't seek out cybersecurity
the way that, you know,
like a CS major might
or a computer science major.
But, you know, when I
started working with this team,
it was almost kind of
love at first sight. It
hit all of the buttons
that I had as a
nerd growing up as a
kid. You know, my, my
dad did teach me to
code when I was young.
It was something that I
really enjoyed doing. And so,
you know, being able to
see more of the behind
the scenes of how some
of these technologies and software
that I was using as
a consumer, how all of
this was working was very
interesting to me. And I
was really intrigued by it.
And at the same time,
working in the field of
security and privacy enabled me
to do something that has
always been really important to
me, which is to help
other people. That's cool. You
found your tribe. Yeah. And
there's, you know, there's a
cause behind what a lot
of us do right there.
We're, we're not totally in
this for ourselves. And that
makes it, I think, a
lot more sustainable in terms
of the high pressure situations
that many of us are
in from time to time
because of, you know, what
we do for a living.
And, you know, when you
realize that you're part of
something bigger that really drives,
motivates you, How do, how
do companies, or how should
companies find balance between being
secure and being private, but
also like mining the data
that they, that they have.
Like, I understand that I
am the product when it
comes to Facebook or Google
or whatever, they look at
every click, not actively, but
they are the metadata that
I am consuming by simply
being by simply looking at
a photo, we always have
that creepy experiment experience. When
you look at something on
Amazon and then suddenly every
website in the world wants
to sell you that thing
you looked at, I want
to understand like security and
privacy. People are trying to
lock things down, but I
assume that the corporations are
trying to open things up.
Like they want to look
at that data, but you
want to keep it private.
So I think to be
honest, I don't think it's
a binary choice. I think
there's, there is a lot
of options along that spectrum.
And I think what companies
are starting to realize now,
and, and I think more
folks in the community will
realize it over time is
that there doesn't have to
be this all or nothing
experience. And that, you know,
creating a product where people
do have the option in
the control to choose the
experience that they're most comfortable
with, I think is really
where, you know, the, the
smartest, most innovative companies are
going. There's, you know, a
number of tech companies who
are, you know, in response
to proposed privacy legislation and
things are, you know, bringing
up the issue of innovation,
you know, and whether or
not all of these new
laws and rules are going
to hamper innovation, particularly in
the technology sector. And the
reality is, is in 2019,
you can't have innovation without
privacy. We simply should not
be accepting technology that doesn't
have privacy protections in it
as a standard of innovation.
And so, you know, a
lot of where I think
the new innovation is going
to come from is, you
know, more along, like I
said, along this spectrum and
giving people more choices so
that you can use some
of these platforms or other
tools in the way that
suits your needs and where
you have more choice and
control upfront about what data
is collected, what it's used
for. And I think part
of this also reflects the
growing awareness and public consciousness
of this issue. 10 years
ago, people were willing to,
you know, to say yes
to something, cause they didn't
particularly understand the risks that
were involved. And so, you
know, when we, a lot
of us, when we first
signed up for, you know,
like a social media account
or an Amazon account, you
know, it, it was more
of, I think what we
can think of in that
traditional sense of like, am
I willing to trade my
data for this convenience or
for this service? And fortunately,
we're now getting to the
point, not just with, but
as a society where we
can have a more sophisticated
and nuanced conversation about what
types of conveniences do you
want. Right. So again, moving
away from that all or
nothing model in creating more,
more options so that, you
know, somebody who is comfortable
or who perceives value or
trade offs a little bit
differently can go to one
end of the spectrum if
they want. But I think
most of us are actually
going to fall somewhere in
the middle, right. Where you
are I'm okay. Giving Amazon
parts of my information because
you know, of the service
or experience that I have
with them, that doesn't necessarily
mean that I'm comfortable with
them, shared it with all
of their partners. Right. And
so I think we're, like
I said, we're moving in,
in what I think is
a positive direction in terms
of the level of sophistication
that we're able to have
in our conversations, not just
as customers and consumers, but
you know, also with our
policymakers and regulators, and this
is, you know, it's a
trend that's happened, you know,
in other industries we've, you
know, happened in security first,
I think, and now privacy
is, is following suit. And,
you know, a lot of
that has to do with
the fact that privacy is
moving out of just legal
conversation. We used to talk
all the time about how
security was like coming out
of the corners of the
it department and now becoming
mainstream. Right. And privacy is
going through a similar evolution
right now. You know, it's
just that it's origin started
in the legal department. It
feels like one of the
challenges with privacy and security
and I'm gonna use them
as a group for now
is the proactive versus the
reactive where everything's totally fine
until one minute it's dramatically
in catastrophic, not fine. Like
I might have a slider
bar that describes my privacy
preference, like we're talking about,
and my nontechnical parent might
set that privacy bar somewhere,
but then something happens that
makes them feel gross. And
then they immediately flip out
because of lack of understanding,
lack of education, how do
we build controls and systems
such that we don't always
take a great int like
you described and flip it
into a binary, because like
you say, it's great until
it's totally not great. I
didn't know. You knew that
about me and now I'm
upset. Sure. So I think,
you know, the way that
you described this in terms
of being proactive is exactly
kind of the, the remedy
here. And, and I don't
mean proactive in terms of
just offering that slider bar
or that, that setting, right?
Like there, there are companies
and platforms that have dozens
and dozens of privacy settings,
and that it's really overwhelming
for the average consumer. They,
you know, to just look
at this laundry list of
options, some of them, you
may not even understand. And
so we think part of,
you know, this, this notion
of being proactive that has
to do with first understanding
what the expectations of your
users and customers are, if
you can imagine, even in
our personal lives, it's a
very jarring when somebody does
something that seems out of
character or when somebody doesn't
live up to your expectations,
you know, it's easy to
get to support. It's easy
to feel violated. And, you
know, there's a lot of
things that we can, you
know, that we experience or
learn in our interpersonal relationships
that also apply to the
relationship that companies and brands
have with their customers. So
it shouldn't surprise us that,
you know, my, my friends
or family, you know, may
feel uncomfortable when I do
something that seems out of
character in the same way
that my customers may get
really uncomfortable if you know,
my company or my team
does something that they didn't
expect from us. Right. And
so there's a lot of
just fun, foundational and fundamental
things in terms of human
interaction and communication that is
now being applied in B
technology space and in bringing
in a lot more expertise
from other disciplines other than
just the strict engineering or
product development track. Right. I
mean, I do not have
a technical background. Like I
said, I started in Marine
biology. My master's degree is
in communications. This is, you
know, different disciplines who understand
different aspects of humanity who
are coming into tech to
say, you know, we have,
we have some information, we
have some knowledge that can
actually help you be better
at what you're trying to
do. You're bringing up a
really interesting point is I've
been writing about interpersonal relationships
and I'm starting to figure
out obvious things. I think
we've all figured out is
that when expectations are not
met, that's when anger and
fear kind of happen. Like
if you, if I understood
ahead of time that X,
Y, Z thing was going
to happen, then I would
feel some kind of way,
but I was surprised. And
it's that surprise? It's that
email that, Oh, all my
information at this hotel chain
is now public. Wow. That
does not meet my expectations.
Yeah. I mean, like who
knew that Marriott was actually
holding on to all of
those passport numbers for that
long? I thought they just
wanted it so I could
check in, they don't need
it after. Yup. And so,
you know, this is, you
know, the, like I said,
these, these companies that are
a little bit more forward
thinking in, in really focusing
on their customers and their
expectations of their users, you
know, getting, having a pulse
on what their expectations are
and how they feel about
certain things. You know, I
have conversations with my teams
all the time where I'm
like, look, our customers don't
expect that we have this
information or that we're doing
this certain thing with it.
So why, why are we
right? And it puts more
onus on the technical teams
to, to justify all of
that behavior. And in some,
you know, that isn't enough
feedback for them to say,
you know, you're absolutely right.
Let's just kill it. And
then, you know, the project
goes away or the collection
goes away. I mean, we've
moved, removed a number of
features even within our own
mobile app based on feedback
from our users on their
expectations. And, you know, so
again, it's, you have to
proactively understand who you're building
things for and, and what
they're expecting from you. Well,
not to put you on
the spot too much, but
you had a great tweet.
One of those real talk
type tweets where you said
it's not engineers who cause
the worst privacy issues it's
MBAs. And I, you certainly
have to, you know, go,
you know, move seamlessly between
the business people and the
technical people. But why would
you, why do you say
that? Why is it that
the MBAs might, might inadvertently
or fully verdantly drive the,
make the, the worst privacy
issues? I think a lot
of it is because they
don't always understand what it
is they're asking for. And
so they, you know, they,
they look at a business
problem or business challenge, you
know, from the perspective of
how can I solve this
through a certain lens. And,
you know, to be honest
right now, like the, the
big thing that like everybody
in B school seems to
be graduating with is this
like obsession with data as
if data is the fix-all
for everything Mine at all
right. Mine and sell it
tomorrow. And if like volumes
of data inherently bring more
value, right? Like having a
lot of data really doesn't
help your business at all,
if you don't know how
to analyze it and use
it properly, right. And then
you're just paying to store
it and protect it and
secure it. And then you
have these situations where things
catastrophes happen. And, and so
I think that just a
lot of it has to
do with the fact that,
you know, a lot of,
and a lot of MBAs
will not necessarily even end
up being for like that
particular tour. I wasn't even
necessarily thinking about like executives,
I'm thinking about like product
managers, right. And you know,
the folks who, who think
they, you know, they're just
kind of solving problems through
like a more narrow lens
engineers. I have found are
very aware of what data
is being collected, where it's
going, what it's being used
for. Cause they, they work
in these systems day to
day. And so in my
experience, working with engineers, all
I have to do is
give them the guidance of
here's, what you can do.
Here's what you can't do.
And they can build the
systems to meet those requirements.
But, you know, for the
folks who have different success
metrics, I think a lot
of it just has to
do with the, they don't
really understand the consequences of
what they're asking for or
what has to be built
or what, you know, actual
practices will come out of
those expectations. Hey folks, you're
a very good developer, probably
regardless. You do write bugs,
that's unavoidable. What is affordable
is wasting time trying to
track down the cause of
those bugs century.io provides full
stack error tracking that lets
you monitor and fix problems.
In real time, you can
see the severity and the
scope of the error get
immediate access to the stack,
trace, connect the problem to
the commit that caused it
and fix it without delay
century. It's a name so
common that they have to
include the top level domain
in their advertising to make
sure you remember it. century.io,
that century dot I O
open source, full stack web
apps, native apps, mobile games,
smart oven mitts. If you
can program it, they can
make it far easier to
fix any errors you encounter
with it. Your code may
be broken, let's fix it
together. Visit century.io. It feels
like a lot of startups
basically start with a perspective
of just log everything, get
telemetry on everything and we'll
figure out what's important or
what's useful later because everyone
clicks the ULA when they
sign up early on and
no one really goes back
and reasserts that ULA as
things change in the future.
But so know kind of
open by default and unlimited
telemetry by default can kind
of lull us into a,
a, a sense of, of
security and things are okay.
When huge amounts of data
are being logged, it just
really never were asked for
or needed. Right. Exactly. I
mean, so I think there's
two distinct things here is
there are certainly services and
apps who are, and I
think the New York times had
a really good example of
this a couple of months
ago with their story about
these apps that were collecting
location data, but they weren't
actually like location based apps,
right. They're just collecting location
data and then kind of
be coming like a data
broker for those things and
selling that information to other
parties. Right. And, and again,
to your earlier point, that
that surprised a lot of
people, they were not expecting
that, you know, this flashlight
app is collecting, you know,
location data, but there's also
the expectation and realm where,
you know, people would be
expecting location data to be
collected. But, you know, for
example, by a company who's
actually like, you know, providing
that transportation, but there's the
conversation in the industry, at
least with those of us
who, who do this full
time inside companies is no,
we don't expect that anyone
is actually reading terms of
service. It's just not for
human consumption, to be honest.
Right. And Sarah, we're thinking
about creating more of like
security and privacy that you
can actually feel in your
experience of using the product.
Right? So instead of just,
you know, having, you know,
this contractual consent process, when
you first create your account
or first use an app,
thinking about what are you
doing in the app and
what are the moments that
matter in that experience where
we could surface some of
this information and help you
make a more informed decision.
Right? So, you know, it's
not just like the one
and done of when you
create an account, but we
actually want this to be
part of the user experience
so that there aren't any
surprises. And so that, you
know, in those moments where
you have the opportunity to
make a choice, that you're
aware that that choice exists
and that, you know, you
know, you're given the tools
and the information in order
to take action based on
your preference. Are you familiar
with the term, the uncanny
Valley when it comes to
three D rendering of faces?
I am not. If I
may explain really briefly. So
this is where like, Hey,
that's a cute robot. It's
like a Wally. And then
like, Oh wow, that robot
has a face. That's cute.
Oh my God, that looks
like a zombie. Like as
you start to render things
and they look like more
and more like people, there's
a moment when it's like,
look at that, it's got
dead eyes and then it
suddenly becomes amazing again. Right.
There's an uncanny Valley of
privacy and security when it
comes to things like artificial
intelligence was like, Oh, that's
delightful. Oh, that's so cool.
Like, Oh my goodness, they're
putting different faces on my
Netflix album art because they
know what I've been looking
at. And now they're trying
to make me click on
movies that suck. That's the,
I've just fallen into the
unbaked Kenny Valley, uncanny Valley
of privacy. Like I get
why they want to know
stuff, but then there's a
moment it's like, Oh, that
went way too far. I
think we're still as an
industry trying to figure out
what that uncanny Valley of
privacy is. Well, and I
think that there's, I mean,
some of those examples, I
think are more about companies
building features and tools in
order to collect more data
versus look, you know, thinking
about what data would make
the service better and just,
and, you know, building something
that is worthwhile for the
user, right. Based on that
data, there is unfortunately, you
know, pockets of technology companies
where they're thinking about, you
know, we really want this
data set over here that
we don't currently collect. What
can we build in order
to work that well? And
so it's backwards, right? And
so, you know, the privacy
and security teams are sitting
down with product teams and
engineers to say, there needs
to be a justification for
this feature, from the user
perspective. First, we're not going
to build a product for
the purpose of collecting data.
And that's, that's a shift
in the way that a
lot of Silicon Valley companies
have traditionally thought. That is
a really interesting way of
thinking about it. And that's
very helpful to me because
I work on, you know,
developer tools and we have
this command line where people
are typing in different commands
and we collect anonymous telemetry.
We're very explicit to all
public about what we, and
we actually released the telemetry
data back out to the,
to the customer about like,
what are they typing at
the command line? But we
want to be careful that
we don't catch like code
names and, you know, secret
namespaces of people's projects and
stuff. So, you know, what
ends, what starts as a
black list becomes a white
list. And this is all
very useful data that helps
us improve the product, but
that, that generic by giving
us your data, it helps
us improve the product is
such a vagary. It doesn't
feel like this is a
substantively making the product better.
So you're saying invert, the
whole thing, flip it on
its head and say, what
can we collect specifically to
make the product better now,
Do we need that to
make the product better? In
fact, I have a number
of heart to heart conversations
with folks all the time,
not just at my own
company, but you know, across
the, the industry where, you
know, the conversation we're having
is first, I need you
to justify to me that
this problem can only be
solved with more data, right?
And again, it's, you know,
this is where it got.
I'm going back to the
comment about MBAs is like,
data is not the answer
for everything. And sometimes it's
just a matter of, you're
not using the data you
already have in a really
smart way. So, you know,
before we get to the
point of what is the
feature, you know, before we
get to the conversation of
what do we need to
collect in order to enable
this feature? You know, the,
the question is prove to
me that data is the
only solution, right? That it's
the only path, because from
my perspective, collecting more data
in order to solve a
problem should be, you know,
last case scenario, we should
have exhausted all of the
alternatives before we assume that
collecting data is going to
be the answer. This sounds
like a song that I
want to sing. And I'm
a fan. I like this
perspective and this way of
thinking, how do we build
that into the ethos of
everyone? And then how do
you explain it to nontechnical
parent and God help us
nontechnical lawmaker? You know, to
be honest, I don't know
if we can actually do
that without building it into
the product. First I look
at, I mean, I know
from a privacy perspective, there's,
you know, some very vocal
and valid criticisms in terms
of like, you know, some
of the platform companies and
social media companies, but one
of the great things that
we've gotten from all of
those companies is massive awareness
and visibility among consumers about
security issues. You know, Google
made HTTPS a thing on
the internet, right? I think
some of the engagement that
Facebook has done in their
product has really increased awareness
of things like two factor
authentication or, you know, using
their trusted context feature so
that you can get back
into your account if you
ever get locked out. Right.
And so there is a
lot of value in terms
of the volume of user
base that these companies have.
And I think on the
security side, we have seen
a lot of that awareness
and education happened because these
companies built it into their
products first. And so that
gave billions of people, frequent
engagement using these types of
technologies and tools from a
security perspective. And I think,
you know, those of us
that, you know, that also
work in, in privacy, we
have to build this into
our tools first. I don't
think that you're necessarily, you're
not going to get feedback
from, you know, the average
consumer saying I would like
a privacy feature that does
X, Y, and Z, but
they're going to say as
these are all the things
that I'm worried about or
the things that scare me,
and then we have to
build the tool within the
product and within our services
so that they can become
familiar with what what's the
behavior and what are the
actions that, that you should
be taking if you have
a certain worry or a
certain fear. Yeah, the is
certainly Facebook is the easy,
the big, you know, gorilla
so we can poke at
it. But it makes me
think about those videos that
they send out the auto-generated,
this was year, year videos.
It's like maybe I had
a really crappy year. I
don't want a video with
like jolly music about, you
know, my pet dying or
whatever horrible thing happened this
year. I don't remember ever
asking for those videos to
be made, but I'm sure
that they delight more people
than they don't, but arguably
it only takes one person
who had a horrible year
to be reminded of a
death. And then that needs
to stop those, you know,
that kind of, Well, in
fact, it's, it's one of
the reasons why Facebook actually
does have an option for
you to turn that off
so that you don't get
those reminders. Yeah. Yeah. But
certainly something that you would
only want to turn off
once it had happened once
and been bad. Right. Well,
so for example, I, I
have, I still have the
option turned on to get
those end of year videos,
but what I don't like
are all of the frequent
like memories that they surface,
because I have quite a
few of them that I
don't want to relive over
and over again, they're an
important part of my personal
history and I want them
to be documented and they
were important experiences, but I
don't need to be reminded
every day. Yeah. It's certainly
not on the anniversary. Right.
Exactly. And so, you know,
Facebook did respond to some
of that criticism for exactly
what you're bringing up. I
think that the challenge is
that it's, it's still like
an opt out experience. Right.
So, so you first have
to have that really bad
experience in order to know
that, Oh, I'm going to
go turn this off. Right.
They don't, they don't ask
you if you would like
to have this before they
show you the first one.
And they argument that the
MBA would make. Cause I've
worked with folks that think
like, this is like, well,
but only 5% or single
digit percent of people will
opt in and we can
get 90% if it's opt
out. So clearly it's opt
in by default. And it's
yeah. The, the fact that
we're designing for like the
99% I think is, is
a problem. And it, again,
just goes back to, you
know, like you said, that
the MBAs here where you're
the people who are at
the most risk from both
a security perspective and the
privacy perspective are not the
people who are the most
paranoid. The people who have
the most to lose from
insufficient security or privacy protections
are not the people in
the middle of your bell
curve. And so, you know,
when we teach, you know,
business school or product managers,
you know, to, to build
based on the volume of
people who are going to
use your product, it, it
conditions them to think about,
you know, this is only
valuable if a lot of
people will use it. And
you know what, sometimes the
products that have the biggest
impact in terms of contributing
to making the world a
better place and actually protecting
people are the tools and
products that are used by
small, you know, groups, it
perhaps, you know, on the
margins of your bell curve,
but it has such a
massive impact on their life
because of their risk profile.
And, you know, these are
the ways that security and
privacy professionals think about it,
where, you know, we, we
envisioned the risk profile of
all of these different groups
of people who use our
products. And we say, where
can we have the most
impact in driving down risk?
And that usually happens at
the edge case, not necessarily
in the middle where the
most people are Very, very
powerful perspective. I appreciate you
taking the time to chat
with me today. Yeah, of
course. Thanks again so much
for, for the discussion. I'm
always happy to talk about
these topics. Cause I'm, I'm
excited to see this paradigm
shifting across the industry. We
will include a link to
Melanie's Twitter on the show
notes. We've been talking to
Melanie and sign the security
and privacy communication lead for
Uber and a frequent tweeter
about sharks. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week.